assignment1/draft-rft.md, before:

%%%
title = "Robust File Transfer"
abbrev = "RFT"
ipr = "trust200902"
area = "Internet"
workgroup = "Network Working Group"
submissiontype = "IETF"
keyword = [""]
#date = 2020-04-29T00:00:00Z

[seriesInfo]
name = "RFC"
value = "2100"
stream = "IETF"
status = "informational"

[[author]]
initials="H."
surname="Cech"
fullname="Hendrik Cech"
organization = "TUM"
  [author.address]
  email = "hendrik.cech@tum.de"

[[author]]
initials="M."
surname="Engelbart"
fullname="Mathis Engelbart"
organization="TUM"
  [author.address]
  email="mathis.engelbart@tum.de"
%%%

{mainmatter}

# Introduction
This RFC describes the protocol "Robust File Transfer" (RFT) that defines the interaction between a server that offers files for clients to download. The communication employs a binary protocol and messages are transferred over the network using UDP.

The authors of this RFC follow the recommendations of RFC4101 "Writing Protocol Models".

# Requirements
- resumable transfers
- reliable transfers
    - checksum validation of transmitted files
- adjusts transfer speeds to avoid link congestion

# Protocol Overview
An RFT server listens for UDP packets at a well-known port. It is assumed that clients and servers can exchange packets using UDP.

```
    Client                          Server
       +                              +
       |  Requests files              |
       | +--------------------------> |
       |                              |
       | Respond with information     |
       | about requested files        |
       | <--------------------------+ |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       | Request byte range of file   |
       | +--------------------------> |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       | Send part of requested       |
       | byte range.                  |
       | <--------------------------+ |
       |                              |
       | Send part of requested       |
       | byte range.                  |
       | <--------------------------+ |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       | Request byte range of file   |
       | +--------------------------> |
       |                              |
       |               .              |
       |               .              |
       |               .              |
       +                              +
```

## File Request
Transfers are initiated by clients who send a list of the desired files to the server. Each file is identified by their path on the server. Optionally, clients can request to not transfer the whole file but start the transfer from a specified byte offset.

The server replies with the total size and checksum of each file before starting with the data transfer.

## Data Transfer
## Transfer Termination

# Flow and congestion control
The server only sends data that was requested by the client. The client only requests as much data as he can buffer. 

The amount of data this is in-flight is limited by the respective congestion window (*cwnd*).

## Flow Control
Client requests range of bytes from server.

### Default fixed buffer size algorithm
The client allocates a receive buffer of fixed size S. Initially he requests S much data.

Every time the client receives data, he inserts that data into the appropriate place in the receive buffer. Then, the client checks if a contineous block of data from the start of the requested file has been received. If so, that block of data is extracted from the buffer and written to persistent storage. The client requests as much new data as necessary from the server to reach S.

## Congestion Control

The server maintains a congestion window *cwnd* that determines how many packets the server sends without receiving another request by the client. Initially *cwnd* is set to X. In each packet the server sends, it sets the *cwnd* size and the remaining number of slots until the server stops sending. The number of remaining slots is decreased by each packet. When the server receives a client request where the packet-loss bit is 0, the *cwnd* is increased by X and reset to that value.

The client monitors the free-CWND-slots field of each message. If it detects a gap (while taking changes in the CWND-size field into account) and that gap is not filled after a certain duration, the client assumes that the packet was lost. The client shares this with the server by setting the packet-loss bit of the next request message to 1.

<!--
Both server and client maintain a packet number that is inserted into every packet that they send; it is each time increased by one. By looking for gaps in the packet numbers, the other party can detect packet losses (a timeout will need to be employed because packets might arrive out of order). If a packet loss is detected, the next message of the other party will inform the sender about the packet loss.

Both parties maintain a *congestion window* (*cwnd*) that is initially set to X. Each party increase their *cwnd* by some amount if they receive a packet and no packet loss occured. If packet loss occured, the *cwnd* is halfed.
!-->

# Dealing with network issues
## Detecting and handling packet loss
## Resuming transfers

# Security Considerations
## DDOS
Server waits for an ACK of the file request response message before starting to send data packets.

# Message Formats
## Header
All message types which are described in the following sections are prepended by this header.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Size (16 bit)                |   Number of free CWND slots   |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Size of CWND (16 bit)        |*| Msg Type    | # of options  |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Option type  | Option length |   Option length-many byte    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Option type  | Option length |   Option length-many byte    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

*: Packet loss detected (if most significant bit = 1)
```

## File-Request
Sent by the client.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|       Number of Files         |         reserved              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Offset (64 bit)                       |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Length              |        Path Name (Length)    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Offset (64 bit)                       |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Length              |        Path Name (Length)    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                            ...                                |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

## Response to File Request
Sent by the server. Presented message structure can be repeated for multiple files.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|     File Index                |          Error code           |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Offset (64 bit)                        |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Size (64 bit)                         |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                   Checksum (256 bit = 32 byte)                |
+                                                               +
|                        ...                                    |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

### Error codes
- 0x00: all OK
- 0x01: file not found
- 0x02: temporarily not available
- 0x03: connection closed
- ...


## Request (Acknowledgement alternative)
Sent by the client. Presented message structure can be repeated for multiple files.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|         File Index             |                              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                Offset of first requested byte (64 bit)        |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                Offset of last requested byte (64 bit)         |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                             ...                               |
+                                                               +
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


## Data
Sent by the server.
```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           File Index          |       reserved                |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      Offset (64 bit)                          |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                   Data (size from header)                    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


<!-- # Credits -->

{backmatter}

<reference anchor='libes' target=''>
 <front>
 <title>Choosing a Name for Your Computer</title>
  <author initials='D.' surname='Libes' fullname='D. Libes'></author>
  <date year='1989' month='November'/>
 </front>
 <seriesInfo name="Communications of the ACM" value='Vol. 32, No. 11, Pg. 1289' />
</reference>

<reference anchor='lottor' target='namedroppers@internic.net'>
 <front>
 <title>Domain Name Survey</title>
  <author initials='M.' surname='Lottor' fullname='M. Lottor'></author>
  <date year='1997' month='January'/>
 </front>
</reference>

<reference anchor='wong' target='http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~mengwong/coolhosts.html'>
 <front>
 <title>Cool Hostnames</title>
  <author initials='M.' surname='Wong' fullname='M. Wong'></author>
  <date/>
 </front>
</reference>

<reference anchor='ts' target=''>
 <front>
 <title>Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats</title>
  <author initials='TS' surname='Stearns' fullname='TS. Stearns'></author>
  <date/>
 </front>
</reference>

Commit message:

Expand some parts of draft-rft a bit

assignment1/draft-rft.md, after:

%%%
title = "Robust File Transfer"
abbrev = "RFT"
ipr = "trust200902"
area = "Internet"
workgroup = "Network Working Group"
submissiontype = "IETF"
keyword = [""]
#date = 2020-04-29T00:00:00Z

[seriesInfo]
name = "RFC"
value = "draft-01"
stream = "IETF"
status = "informational"

[[author]]
initials="H."
surname="Cech"
fullname="Hendrik Cech"
organization = "TUM"
  [author.address]
  email = "hendrik.cech@tum.de"

[[author]]
initials="M."
surname="Engelbart"
fullname="Mathis Engelbart"
organization="TUM"
  [author.address]
  email="mathis.engelbart@tum.de"
%%%

{mainmatter}

# Introduction
This RFC describes the protocol "Robust File Transfer" (RFT) that defines the interaction between a server that offers files and clients that can download those files. The communication employs a binary protocol and messages are transferred over the network using UDP.

The authors of this RFC follow the recommendations of RFC4101 "Writing Protocol Models".

# Requirements
- resumable transfers
- reliable transfers
    - checksum validation of transmitted files
- adjusts transfer speeds to ...
    - adapt to the available resources of the participants
    - avoid link congestion

# Protocol Overview
An RFT server listens for UDP packets at a well-known port. It is assumed that clients and servers can exchange packets using UDP.

```
    Client                          Server
       +                              +
       |  Requests files              |
       | +--------------------------> |
       |                              |
       | Respond with information     |
       | about requested files        |
       | <--------------------------+ |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       | Request byte range of file   |
       | +--------------------------> |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       | Send part of requested       |
       | byte range.                  |
       | <--------------------------+ |
       |                              |
       | Send part of requested       |
       | byte range.                  |
       | <--------------------------+ |
       |                              |
       |                              |
       | Request byte range of file   |
       | +--------------------------> |
       |                              |
       |               .              |
       |               .              |
       |               .              |
       +                              +
```

## File Request
Transfers are initiated by clients who send a list of the desired files to the server. Each file is identified by their path on the server. Optionally, clients can request to not transfer the whole file but start the transfer from a specified byte offset.

The server replies with the total size and checksum of each file before starting with the data transfer.

## Data Transfer
## Transfer Termination

# Flow and congestion control
The server only sends data that was requested by the client. The client only requests as much data as he can buffer. 

The amount of data this is in-flight is limited by the respective congestion window (*cwnd*).

## Flow Control
The client only requests as many bytes from the server as he can handle at once. The server keeps track of the requested byte ranges but can fulfill those requests at his own pace.

### Default fixed buffer size algorithm
The client allocates a receive buffer of fixed size S. Initially he requests S much data.

Every time the client receives data, he inserts that data into the appropriate place in the receive buffer. Then, the client checks if a contineous block of data from the start of the requested file has been received. If so, that block of data is extracted from the buffer and written to persistent storage. The client requests as much new data as necessary from the server to have again requested S byte in total.

If the client suspects that packets have been lost, he should request those specific gap byte ranges again.

## Congestion Control

The server maintains a congestion window *cwnd* that determines how many packets the server sends without receiving another request by the client. Initially *cwnd* is set to X. In each packet the server sends, it sets the *cwnd* size and the remaining number of slots until the server stops sending. The number of remaining slots is decreased by each packet. When the server receives a client request where the packet-loss bit is 0, the *cwnd* is increased by X and reset to that value.

The client monitors the free-CWND-slots field of each message. If it detects a gap (while taking changes in the CWND-size field into account) and that gap is not filled after a certain duration, the client assumes that the packet was lost. The client shares this with the server by setting the packet-loss bit of the next request message to 1.

<!--
Both server and client maintain a packet number that is inserted into every packet that they send; it is each time increased by one. By looking for gaps in the packet numbers, the other party can detect packet losses (a timeout will need to be employed because packets might arrive out of order). If a packet loss is detected, the next message of the other party will inform the sender about the packet loss.

Both parties maintain a *congestion window* (*cwnd*) that is initially set to X. Each party increase their *cwnd* by some amount if they receive a packet and no packet loss occured. If packet loss occured, the *cwnd* is halfed.
!-->

# Dealing with network issues
## Detecting and handling packet loss
Mentioned in congestion control section.

## Resuming transfers

# Security Considerations
## DDOS
Server waits for an ACK of the file request response message before starting to send data packets.

# Message Formats
## Header
All message types which are described in the following sections are prepended by this header.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Size (16 bit)                |   Number of free CWND slots   |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Size of CWND (16 bit)        |*| Msg Type    | # of options  |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Option type  | Option length |   Option length-many byte    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Option type  | Option length |   Option length-many byte    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

*: Packet loss detected (if most significant bit = 1)
```

## File-Request
Sent by the client.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|       Number of Files         |         reserved              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Offset (64 bit)                       |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Length              |        Path Name (Length)    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Offset (64 bit)                       |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Length              |        Path Name (Length)    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                            ...                                |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

## Response to File Request
Sent by the server. Presented message structure can be repeated for multiple files.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|     File Index                |          Error code           |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Offset (64 bit)                        |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                         Size (64 bit)                         |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                   Checksum (256 bit = 32 byte)                |
+                                                               +
|                        ...                                    |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

### Error codes
- 0x00: all OK
- 0x01: file not found
- 0x02: temporarily not available
- 0x03: connection closed
- ...


## Request (Acknowledgement alternative)
Sent by the client. Presented message structure can be repeated for multiple files.

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|         File Index             |                              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                Offset of first requested byte (64 bit)        |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                Offset of last requested byte (64 bit)         |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                             ...                               |
+                                                               +
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


## Data
Sent by the server.
```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           File Index          |       reserved                |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      Offset (64 bit)                          |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                   Data (size from header)                    ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


<!-- # Credits -->

{backmatter}

<reference anchor='libes' target=''>
 <front>
 <title>Choosing a Name for Your Computer</title>
  <author initials='D.' surname='Libes' fullname='D. Libes'></author>
  <date year='1989' month='November'/>
 </front>
 <seriesInfo name="Communications of the ACM" value='Vol. 32, No. 11, Pg. 1289' />
</reference>

<reference anchor='lottor' target='namedroppers@internic.net'>
 <front>
 <title>Domain Name Survey</title>
  <author initials='M.' surname='Lottor' fullname='M. Lottor'></author>
  <date year='1997' month='January'/>
 </front>
</reference>

<reference anchor='wong' target='http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~mengwong/coolhosts.html'>
 <front>
 <title>Cool Hostnames</title>
  <author initials='M.' surname='Wong' fullname='M. Wong'></author>
  <date/>
 </front>
</reference>

<reference anchor='ts' target=''>
 <front>
 <title>Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats</title>
  <author initials='TS' surname='Stearns' fullname='TS. Stearns'></author>
  <date/>
 </front>
</reference>
